= Spanish Stem Gem

== Description
This gem reduces Spanish words to their respective roots. It uses an algorithm
based on Martin Porter's specifications.
 
For more information, visit:
http://snowball.tartarus.org/algorithms/spanish/stemmer.html

== Descripción
Esta gema está para reducir las palabras del Español en sus respectivas raíces,
para ello ultiliza un algoritmo basado en las especificaciones de Martin Porter

Para más información, visite:
http://snowball.tartarus.org/algorithms/spanish/stemmer.html

== Install -- Instalar

  $ sudo gem install estem
or
  $ gem install estem

== Usage
As a reminder, take in consideration that the Spanish language has several non
US-ASCII characters, and because of that, the same data may varied from one
codeset to another.

Please remember to use a UTF-8 compatible encoding while using EStem. Please do
not use String#force_encoding() to convert from one codeset to another, you
might try using String#encode() but this later is more likely to fail, consider
using String#safe_es_stem() when handling incompatibles codesets or the codeset
type is unknown.

  require 'estem'

  puts "albergues".es_stem      # ==> "alberg"
  puts "habitaciones".es_stem   # ==> "habit"

  # EStem will never make unnecessary changes to your input data.
  puts "ALbeRGues".es_stem      # ==> "ALbeRG"
  puts "HaBiTaCiOnEs".es_stem   # ==> "HaBiT"
  puts "Hacinamiento".es_stem   # ==> "Hacin"

You can use <tt>EStem</tt> as a command line tool:
  $ es_stem --in-enc ISO-8859-1 -f input_file.txt

for more information type
  $ es_stem --help

The <tt>es_stem</tt> program do his best trying to tokenized the lines from
the file, you may consider finding an Spanish tokenizer, either way this
program do what it is suppose to do, stem Spanish words.

NOTE: For excellent results, consider replacing one word per line on the files
the program handles.

== Uso
Como recordatorio, ten en cosideración que el Castellano posee muchos
carácteres que están fuera del código ASCII, y por esta razón, los datos pueden
variar de un conjunto de codificación a otro.

Por favor recuerda utilizar sistemas de condificación compatibles con UTF-8
cuando se trabaje con EStem. Por favor no use String#force_encoding para
convertir de un conjunto de codificación a otro, podría utilizar String#encode
pero este último es más probable que falle en el intento, considere utilizar
String#safe_es_stem() si está manejando conjuntos de codificación incompatibles
o se desconoce el tipo.

  require 'estem'

  puts "albergues".es_stem      # ==> "alberg"
  puts "habitaciones".es_stem   # ==> "habit"

  # EStem nunca hará cambios innecesarios a tus datos.
  puts "ALbeRGues".es_stem      # ==> "ALbeRG"
  puts "HaBiTaCiOnEs".es_stem   # ==> "HaBiT"
  puts "Hacinamiento".es_stem   # ==> "Hacin"
  
Para más información ejecuta:
  $ es_stem --help

El programa <tt>es_stem</tt> hará lo posible para separar las palabras de cada
línea del fichero. Sería sensato utilizar otro programa más especializado para
este propósito, de todas maneras, es_stem hace lo que se supone debe hacer,
optener las raíces de las palabras.

NOTA: Para resultados excelentes, considere poner una palabra por línea en los
ficheros que pasará el programa.

== Test

This test is based on the sample input and output text from Martin Porter
website. It includes 28390 test words and their expected stem results.
To run the test, just type:
  rake test

== Pruebas

Esta prueba está basada en un archivo de prueba provisto por Martin Porter.
Incluye 28390 palabras de prueba con sus resultado esperados. Para realizar
la prueba, ejecuta:
  rake test

== Thanks -- Agradecimientos

Ray Pereda https://github.com/raypereda/stemmify/ I used his gem as a guide to
package mine. http://guides.rubygems.org/make-your-own-gem/ as well.

== License -- Licencia

Copyright (c) 2012 Manuel A. Güílamo
 
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:
 
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
 
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE
LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION
OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
